---
title: The kids are alright
date: Wed 24 Apr 2024
slug: the-kids-are-alright
Status: published
---

Social media, mobile phones, video games and now AI are among the crowning jewels of human creation. Infinite libraries of information are in everyone's pocket. Entertaining new formats for instruction and diversion are being created, not by media institutions, but by ordinary people in their spare time. Children are no longer kept apart from each other in classrooms, but have their own virtual worlds in which to create knowledge and share it.

The response from our gerontocracy is predictable: ban it.

As usual, Douglas Adams summed it up:

> I've come up with a set of rules that describe our reactions to technologies:
>
> 1. Anything that is in the world when you're born is normal and ordinary and is just a natural part of the way the world works.
> 2. Anything that's invented between when you're fifteen and thirty-five is new and exciting and revolutionary and you can probably get a career in it.
> 3. Anything invented after you're thirty-five is against the natural order of things.

The truth is that technology is disruptive: it changes societies. In their time, movies, books and even the bicycle all instigated widespread moral panic. Bicycles meant that for the first time, young people could easily meet friends under their own steam, the social network technology of their day.

Today, teachers worry about children in their classrooms "addicted to their phones". So the children aren't paying attention to their lessons, but the truth is many never were. Now instead of sitting at desks like zombies, they're happily engaged in their phones because they have access to something that really interests them.

But disruptive memes are spreading among children! Well why shouldn't children be allowed to create and disseminate knowledge among their peers? Isn't that the essence of education? Or do we think children should be passive, empty vessels into which we pour our approved ideas? If you disagree with the memes children are sharing, you should make an argument for your position, not shut down the debate.

Children are using ChatGPT to write their essays! I'm sorry to tell you, but adults are using ChatGPT to write their emails and reports. Education needs to adapt to the reality that social media is a better way to discover new interests and YouTube is simply a better way to learn basically anything.

There's another sinister undercurrent to the "ban social media and AI" platform. In the case of AI, big tech companies (Google, Facebook, Apple etc.) thought at first that AI would be a "sustaining technology" - that is, because of their ability to invest billions and hire the best engineers, mastery in AI would help to cement their monopolies. But recently, the CEOs have woken up to a growing realisation that AI might well be a "disruptive technology" - as a commodity, AI gives startup companies the ability to challenge Google in search, Facebook in social media and Apple with the idea that maybe we don't all need to use their phones. Their playbook is the same as any other industry cartels: lobby the government to regulate their industries, because regulation raises the table stakes to enter the industry so effectively that startups become non-starters. Facebook will happily pay the governments tax to censor their social networks, as the enormous cost of doing so serves to prevent any challengers to their business.

Note that, this isn't an argument against allowing the Chinese ownership of TikTok. I see real geopolitical reasons why we might not want our media companies in foreign hands. We have had similar legislation against foreign ownership of newspapers, for example.

But ban social media and AI and we stultify our children, lock them out of the most exciting new technological spaces and prevent them from educating themselves.
